
When we left off, we were talking about all of the things that estrogen does to help orient the body toward attraction and sex. Just as a reminder, women have two primary sex hormones, estrogen and progesterone, because our bodies have two jobs that are required for reproduction. That, of course, is attraction and sex, and then pregnancy and implantation.

When we left off, we were talking about the fact that, in addition to the fact that women tend to have a heightened preference for all things sex and sexual activity when estrogen is high and rising across the cycle, that it also seems to make women more attractive and desirable to mates. We talked about the results of this study, which found that women are found more attractive by both women and men at points in the cycle when conception is possible, so during the fertile window of the cycle.

It's also a time when women who are dancers earn more money. Other studies have also found that women smell better, sound better, and move in ways that men find sexier at high fertility in the cycle, compared to low fertility in the cycle. This suggests that, among all the other things that estrogen does, is that it may make women more attractive to men, particularly at times in the cycle when sex can lead to conception.

It also seems to play a role in impacting women's motivation to attract mates. Again, when we're talking about estrogen rising in the cycle during the fertile window, this is a point in the cycle when sex can lead to conception. And so, in addition to the fact that women's bodies are rolling out all the stops in terms of looking maximally attractive, it also shifts women's motivational states in ways that are consistent with the desire to attract mates.

Research has found, for example, that women tend to put more effort into their appearance and dress sexier at high fertility in the cycle compared to at low fertility in the cycle. Just to tell you about one study that was done, this was a study that was done at the University of Texas, and it was done when I was a graduate student there. It was done by one of my contemporaries, Dr. Kristina Durante. She had women come into the research lab at two different points in the cycle.

She had them come into the lab once during the cycle when fertility was high. This was something that was confirmed using a urinalysis test, which tests for the luteinizing hormone, which is something that gets released right prior to ovulation in very high levels. And so they had women coming into the lab when luteinizing hormone levels were high, which means that they're at a fertile point in their cycle and their body is preparing to ovulate.

Then they had them come in a week later, after ovulation had occurred, and women's bodies had shifted gears into the progestogenic phase of the cycle, which is a time when conception is not possible. She had them come into the lab to do a variety of tasks. But one of the things that she also did is, she just took a picture of what the women were wearing. It wasn't a special day. This is just what women were wearing to the research lab to show up to do their experiment. What they found was that, reliably, women were wearing sexier outfits and revealing more skin at their high-fertility session compared to the low-fertility session.

They tested this over nearly 150 women, and they tested this within subjects, meaning that they looked at women twice, once at low fertility, once at high fertility, and made these comparisons. What they found was that women did show significantly more skin at high fertility compared to low fertility, and that people also evaluated their outfits as being more subjectively sexy at high fertility compared to low fertility, suggesting that women may feel sexier and be more motivated to dress in sexy ways at times in the cycle when estrogen is high and when conception is possible from sex.

In this same study, she also gave women—and again, these women came into the lab twice, once when estrogen is high, and fertility is high, once when progesterone is high, and fertility is low— and she told them to imagine that they were going to a party that night and that it was going to be over at a friend's house, and there was going to be a lot of attractive members of the opposite sex there, as well as a lot of attractive members of their same sex there. Then she told them to draw what they would like to wear to the party that night.

She, again, had them do this twice. She had them do this once at high fertility and once at low fertility across the cycle. Then they scored the outfits according to subjective ratings of sexiness, so having a group of independent researchers, who were blind to the condition that the women were in, evaluate how sexy the outfits were. They also measured the square millimeters of flesh that were revealed in the outfit choice that was drawn by the women.

What they found was that, at the high-fertility session, women drew outfits that were significantly sexier than the outfits that they drew at the low-fertility sessions, and they exposed more skin in the photographs. So here you can see some of the results on this little figure. You can see that the women revealed significantly greater number of square millimeters of flesh in the high-fertility drawings, compared to the low-fertility drawings.

Here we have these two outfits. They're both pretty cute, but the one is obviously significantly sexier and shows more flesh—this was her high-fertility drawing, and the one on the left was the low-fertility drawing. This is something that's also been replicated using a shopping paradigm, where they had women come into the lab and do some online shopping with a little storefront that they had set up in the research lab.

They had the women buying things and selecting the items that they'd most like to buy, if they were shopping in that moment. They had them do this at both low and high fertility. And lo and behold, yet again, women were choosing significantly sexier clothes at high fertility compared to the low-fertility session. If you've ever had that outfit in the back of your closet, that sexy outfit that you bought, that you're like, "Why did I buy this?", this might be why. It could be that was your high-fertility outfit, and you didn't even know that it was going on.

The first half of the cycle, the first 14 days of the cycle, what we call the follicular phase of the cycle, when estrogen is the primary sex hormone, this is when our body and our brain are oriented toward attraction. Again, we find these increases in women's preferences for cues related to testosterone levels. We find that women are more interested in men in general. Women are more interested in sex. They're more, they enjoy sex more, they have more sex, they dress sexier, they smell sexier, they sound sexier.

Everything, all the red carpet is being rolled out on everything related to attraction and sex during that time. Then after ovulation occurs and women shift into the luteal phase of the cycle, this is when sex can no longer lead to conception. The job of women's second primary sex hormone, progesterone, is to redistribute all of that effort that was being geared toward attraction and toward sex, and to shift that effort toward preparing the body for the possibility of implantation and pregnancy.

This is what happens during the last two weeks of the cycle, which is known as the luteal phase. This is something that's characterized by the release of the sex hormone, progesterone. Progesterone essentially is orienting all of the cells in the body to prepare for the possibility of an embryo implanting and for the possibility of pregnancy. This means that, as women are shifting into the luteal phase, they're going to experience both physical and psychological changes that help to promote these types of outcomes.

Essentially, if we think about this in terms of the different types of adaptive problems that women have to solve in order to reproduce, what you see is, when women are shifting between these two hormonal states, is that they're shifting toward a body that's solving one set of adaptive challenges and then into another. What are some of the differences that we tend to see when women shift into the luteal phase relative to the follicular phase?

Well, one of the changes that women experience—and this is by far the one that women notice the most— is that women become more sensitive to signs of threat. This isn't just physical threat, it's also social threat. Women's brains become more primed to consider things as threatening during this time compared to other times in the cycle because our bodies are in a state of heightened vulnerability.

As our body is preparing for the possibility of pregnancy, we're preparing for being in a state in which we're very reliant on our partners for things like protection and provisioning, as they're preparing for the possibility of pregnancy and childcare. Because our bodies are more vulnerable during this time, it actually changes the threshold that our brain uses before considering something a threat. This is because of something that we call the smoke detector principle.

To introduce you to the idea of the smoke detector principle, I want us to think about our smoke detectors for a minute because we all have at least one in our house somewhere. We've all probably had the experience of burning some food or you're making microwave popcorn, and then the smoke detector goes off. The reason that our smoke detectors tend to go off, even with little slights like making popcorn or burning a pizza, is because smoke detectors are wired to be intentionally oversensitive to signs of a fire.

The reason for this is that it's better to be safe than sorry. You'd much rather have a smoke detector that goes off when you're making popcorn than you would one that doesn't go off when there's actually a fire. And so, when smoke detectors are designed, they're actually designed to be oversensitive, to be super-sensitive, so that way they don't miss an actual threat. Our brain is actually wired the same way when it comes to threatening stimuli.

When it comes to things that can kill us, either from the outside or the inside, so things like pathogens, those things kill us from the inside, or things like predators, which are things that kill us from the outside, we tend to overgeneralize fear and disgust. For example, if it's a dark night and you hear scratching from outside, you tend to err on the side of assuming there's a real threat there, because our brain is wired to err on the side of caution in the way that would have historically led to a greater probability of being able to pass down our genes.

It's better to be safe than sorry, and it's better to assume that something is threatening and actually have it not be threatening than to make the reverse mistake—assume that something is not threatening and it actually is. Our brain is wired to err on the side of caution when it comes to things that can kill us. This is why fear tends to overgeneralize. We don't like all snakes, and we don't like all spiders. We don't discriminate. We don't say, "Oh, no, that's a good one, and no, no, he's a nice one."

We're also that way with disgust. We don't care that you sneezed because of allergies. I don't care. I don't want that on my arm. We overgeneralize with things that are potentially threatening to us. The degree to which our body overgeneralizes with things like fear and disgust changes depending on the vulnerability of our body. The more vulnerable we are to a threat, the more quick we are to overassume that even minor slights are the sign of danger.

Enter the luteal phase brain, and you have a brain that is primed for fear and anxiety. A lot of women report having heightened anxiety, especially relationship anxiety, in the second half of the cycle. It's because our brain, using its brilliant smoke detector design, knows that here we are in this really vulnerable state. Our body is preparing for this really vulnerable state of pregnancy, in which women have historically been very dependent on their partners, and any sign that there might be some sort of trouble in paradise with their relationship seems like a sign of alarm.

This is the reason that a lot of women can feel totally comfortable with the idea that their partner has to stay late at work one night. But then two weeks later, when she's in the luteal phase, all of a sudden, the alarm bells are going off. "Wait a minute. What's going on? Why are you staying late? Does he not care enough about me, or is there something worse going on?" Women's brains are more quickly to trigger the alarm bells during the luteal phase than they are in the follicular phase because we're in a heightened, vulnerable state.

The more vulnerable we are, the more quickly our alarm bells sound; the less vulnerable we are, the less easily our alarm bells sound. This is also why chihuahuas bark more than big dogs. The little dogs bark a lot because they're vulnerable, they're small. The big dogs don't need to bark as much because they can protect themselves. And so is true with our brain.

And what we find from imaging studies is that, during the luteal phase of the cycle, the amygdala in the brain, which is the fear center in the brain, actually becomes more interconnected, functionally connected, to other areas of our brain than what it is in the follicular phase. So our brain actually becomes more wired to detect threat coming from any different area of the brain, and it's also more quickly to sound the alarm bells on threat to all of the different areas of the brain. So we become more sensitive to signs of potential threat, which, of course, can lead to heightened levels of anxiety and also can lead to distress, especially within close relationships.

We also tend to find that, as women are transitioning into the luteal phase, that this is a time when women experience worsening mood. It's usually a depressed mood. When I say depressed, I'm not talking about clinical depression, not the clinical depressed mood, but rather that their mood, rather than being outward-facing and energy-exerting, tends to be more inward-facing and energy-conserving.

Women are generally less motivated to be going out and seeking pleasure during the luteal phase of the cycle compared to the follicular phase of the cycle. This shift in our motivational states, where we tend to be less optimistic and out to go and conquer the world, but instead tend to be a little bit more subdued in focusing inward, is part of the metabolic shifts that we experience as we transition between the follicular phase of the cycle and the luteal phase of the cycle.

What research finds is, women's motivational states and their moods tend to be less sunny and optimistic and outward-facing, and tend to be more inward-facing and almost low-key, subdued, because their body is shifting their motivational states in ways that are going to conserve energy, instead of having them go out into the world and doing things that could potentially burn calories or be dangerous.

Indeed, one of the changes that we tend to see as women are transitioning into the luteal phase of the cycle is that women do tend to have lower mood. This is the result of a study that was done cross-culturally. You can see all of the countries that they collected data on when you look at this map. But this is a premenstrual mood map, and this is mapping women's emotional states as they are in the last two weeks of the cycle compared to the first.

All of the regions that are colored are the areas that they were actually able to collect data from. You can see that they collected this from places around the world. What you can see is that there wasn't a single country that they studied in which women reported feeling happier in the second two weeks of the cycle than they did in the first two weeks of the cycle. The first two weeks of the cycle, when estrogen is the primary hormone, we tend to be motivated to go out and socialize and do things that are going to put us into proximity with potential mates.

We also are looking really attractive, and it's a good time to be showing that off in terms of mate attraction. We have less of a metabolic load because our body isn't preparing for the possibility of pregnancy. And so women tend to feel lighter, happier, and more energetic in the first two weeks of the cycle than they do in the second two weeks of the cycle, with many women reporting feeling more subdued and almost sad during the second half of the cycle compared to the first.

Another change that happens in the second half of the menstrual cycle, and this is one that women aren't really told about, is that women burn more calories during the second two weeks of the cycle than they do during the first. When the body is preparing for pregnancy, which is what it's doing in the luteal phase of the cycle, it is requiring a lot of energy to create and lead to cell differentiation in the endometrial layer, to prepare for the possibility of implantation and pregnancy.

This raises women's metabolic rate by between 7 and 11% every cycle, in the second two weeks of the cycle. If you're a woman who eats about 2,000 calories a day, this is an additional 140 to 200 calories a day that your body burns just by virtue of the fact that you're releasing progesterone. This is the result. What you're looking at here is a figure. This was a study that was done on women, where they measured their basal metabolic rate as they slept, and they did this at different points in their cycle.

What they found is this very shift that I told you about, where women on average, and it ranged between about 7 to 11%, but when progesterone is being released, our body, it just revs up the metabolism. It's because creating that endometrial layer and differentiating those cells requires a lot of tissue-building, and this requires a lot of energy and a lot of amino acids. It's a big, expensive job for the body.

It's also a time when our basal body temperature increases. One of the ways that women are actually able to track their cycles, if they're trying to figure out which hormone and what cycle phase they're in, is by tracking their basal body temperature across the cycle. Because after progesterone starts being released, so after you ovulate and you're in the luteal phase, your body temperature, your core body temperature, increases by almost a full degree. So you become warmer.

And as your body becomes hotter, this is part of your metabolism revving up. This requires more energy to create that thermic event that's allowing you to be hotter. What we find is that, even when women are sleeping, you get greater energy expenditure in the second half of the cycle than you do in the first half of the cycle. This might not surprise you, but given that metabolism is increasing, women's hunger also increases during this time.

Here, this is a figure looking at changes in women's sexual desire and food intake over the course of the cycle. This was data that was collected on a large sample of women, and they followed them across two cycles, and they used hormone tests to confirm their hormone levels. What they found was that, when you look at sexual desire, the pattern follows what we talked about when we were talking about the follicular phase and how estrogen rises at times in the cycle when conception is possible.

What you can see is that sexual desire is highest right near ovulation. In those middle bars, you can see that sexual desire is very high. Then when you look at that light-colored bar next to it, you can see that food intake is actually really low. Interestingly enough, you do get this sort of trade-off between sexual desire and physical hunger, where the more sexual desire we feel, that that oftentimes comes at the expense of having lower hunger, and then vice versa. When we're more hungry and need to eat more, our sexual desire decreases.

Part of this refers to this idea that we talked about a little bit earlier, which is just that you can't spend the same dollar twice. Your body has a limited energy budget, and you can only do so many things with that energy budget. If you're directing energy toward mating, that's not going to give you as much energy to be able to find food and digest food and do all the things that your body needs to do to get food in your system.

We make these different types of trade-offs across the cycle. One of those trade-offs is that, when we're close to ovulation, we get an increase in sexual desire, and we tend to get a decrease in food intake. Then, when we get into the luteal phase of the cycle, when progesterone is being released, and sex can no longer lead to conception, during this period, we see that food intake increases, but that sexual desire decreases.

There's also been a number of studies showing that, in addition to hunger increasing and women's basal metabolic rate increasing, that women also tend to report feeling more subjectively hungry during this time. And part of the things that we tend to think about as problematic, many women don't love the way that they feel during the last two weeks of their menstrual cycle. And one of the reasons that women don't like the way that they feel is because they feel like they're hungry and they're having food cravings all the time.

And the reason that women are hungry and having food cravings all the time is because nobody tells them about that. They don't tell them that their body is increasing the number of calories that they're burning in the second two weeks of the cycle compared to the first. Instead, women are given a one-size-fits-all set of nutritional guidelines where they're told, "You need to eat X number of calories a day. If you're eating more than that, well, then that's just too much."

So then, here's a woman whose body is increasing its energy expenditure by 7 to 11% and thinking, "I'm starving. I'm so hungry." They're feeling tired and they're feeling grumpy, and then they're wondering why their son's Halloween candy looks so good. It's because they haven't been eating enough. This is just another one of these changes that we experience as our body is preparing for pregnancy.

Pregnancy is an incredibly physiologically costly event, and our body has to rev up our metabolism to get our body prepared for pregnancy, while also trying not to lose some of the stored body fat that we have on ourselves that's also going to be supportive of a pregnancy. During the luteal phase of the cycle, we tend to see this increase in hunger and the decrease in sexual desire.

Here's just some more research demonstrating the decrease in sexual desire. This is something that, again, is very common, and it's something that many women are not told about—and that is the fact that, yes, sexual desire does increase in the fertile window of the cycle. When estrogen levels are high and rising, this corresponds to an increase in sexual desire. But as women are transitioning into the luteal phase, this is also associated with a decrease in sexual desire.

Progesterone is actually antagonistic to sexual desire. Many women have had the experience of—and I've been asked this a number of times by women, too— where they'll get an increase in sexual desire that happens as soon as they get their period, and they're wondering what that's all about, because that's usually not a time in the cycle when fertility is high, but women notice that their libido increases when they get their period, and it's because, when they get their period, progesterone falls, and progesterone is actually sexually inhibitory.

The reason that progesterone is sexually inhibitory is that sex is physically and physiologically costly. Sex is physically costly, just because it requires effort to do, and your body is in a state when it's conserving resources because its resting metabolic rate is higher and it needs to conserve resources for the possibility of pregnancy. But it's also a time when exposure to some of the germs that you get in your body when you're having sex is a little bit less of a good idea.

The reason for this is twofold. One, the maternal immune system gets functionally dampened in response to progesterone release. One of the changes that happens when we transition into the second half of the menstrual cycle is that we shift from a pro-inflammatory type of an immune response into an anti-inflammatory type of an immune response. We call this shifting from a Th1 response to a Th2 type response.

The reason that our bodies shift our immune responses across the cycle is because our body needs to be able to allow for an embryo to implant without attacking it. The fact is, an embryo has an awful lot in common with things like cancer cells and things like parasites because they have rapidly dividing cells that are not totally genetically related to the self, and it's trying to take a bunch of resources from the body. That's something that the immune system would normally flag as being either a parasite or a cancerous cell, and its job would be to search and destroy.

But of course, we don't want to do that if we have an embryo implanting. So a workaround that the body has made is that it functionally turns down the volume on the immune system during the luteal phase of the cycle. This allows for the possibility of implantation, but it does open up the possibility of opportunistic infections. This is a time in the cycle when women need to be a little bit more cautious when it comes to exposure to germs.

Research finds that, when progesterone levels are high, that women's disgust sensitivity increases, so women become more easily disgusted. This is a form of our behavioral immune system being activated. Our behavioral immune system is psychological changes and behavioral changes that keep us away from things that can make us sick.

Our behavioral immune system tends to be most active during times when our physical immune system is suppressed, which is the case when we're in the luteal phase of the cycle and during pregnancy. What you tend to find is that, when progesterone levels are high and the immune system is suppressed, that this is related to increases in disgust sensitivity. We see this both in pregnant women and we see this in women during the luteal phase of the cycle.

The second reason that women tend to experience a decrease in sexual desire in the second half of the cycle is because, whenever you are having sex, the material that's entering your body is genetically non-related to you. That's something that the immune system is designed to go after and attack. Any time that the immune system is attacking something, it creates inflammatory activity.

And so, if you are having sex in the luteal phase of the cycle, and particularly if you're having sex near what's known as the implantation window, and this is that window in time in the luteal phase when the endometrial layer is receptive to an implanting embryo, during this time, having inflammatory activity near the cervix and the vaginal canal is suboptimal for implantation. And so, another reason that women tend to get a downregulation in their sexual desire in the second half of the cycle is because they are essentially minimizing the probability of having sexual activity at times when sex comes with a cost.

Now, this doesn't mean that women shouldn't be having sex in the second half of the cycle, because we are actually really an interesting species in that we are one of the only species that exists where females have sex outside of the fertile window. This serves a really important function in terms of promoting pair bonds.

But instead, it just turns the volume down, because the cost of sex is greater. The cost of sex is greater in the luteal phase, and the benefits are lower in the luteal phase, than they are in the follicular phase. Because of this, we tend to see that female sexuality is cyclical, with it being highest near the fertile window in the cycle and being lowest in the luteal phase.

These hormonal changes that women experience across the cycle, they're pretty pervasive and they have an impact on everything. We've talked about some of them. They impact everything ranging from the way that we smell to the quality of our sleep. Our energy levels change across the cycle, attraction to partners. We talked about the fact that, when women are at high fertility, that they have this heightened preference for testosterone markers, and that kind of goes away when they're in the second half of the cycle.

It can affect things like the types of symptoms that they have and the severity of the symptoms that they have from chronic conditions. For example, research finds that women who have asthma oftentimes have worsening of symptoms in the second half of the cycle compared to the first. The reason for this is, among the whole suite of changes that our body experiences as they're preparing for pregnancy, our respiratory drive increases, meaning that our bodiesneed to breathe; that feeling that we have where we need to breathe, increases.

It does because our respiration rate increases in the luteal phase, because our body is having to work harder to prepare for the possibility of pregnancy. This leads to worsening of asthma symptoms, for example. You get differences in mood regulation, you get differences in responses to therapy, and the list goes on and on and on. There's a whole range of changes, as our body is shifting between the state that's optimized for attraction and sex, to the state that's optimized for pregnancy and implantation that our bodies experience, and we experience these on a monthly basis.

This has led some people to really bristle at the idea of speaking too loudly about the fact that hormones matter. People have suggested that talking about hormones and the way that hormones impact women is something that can potentially be dangerous, because women have a history of being treated as overly emotional, less-rational versions of men. Sometimes it can feel like acknowledging that sex hormones have this huge range of effects that they actually have can feel really risky.

It can feel like something that can be bad for women because it can be used to argue that we shouldn't be able to vote or we shouldn't be able to own land or we shouldn't be in positions of power because we're just too hormonal. Is this idea dangerous? I'm going to start this—I'm going to answer this question by saying that, while it is true that women's hormones vary cyclically, they do not vary unpredictably.

One of the arguments that gets put out there about why it's problematic that women have these cycling hormones is that, "Oh, women are fickle and they're overly emotional and unpredictable." The fact is that our hormones do cycle, but they cycle in a way that is incredibly predictable. I always tell people, if you tell me a woman's age and you tell me the first day of her last menstrual cycle, I will be able to tell you with a pretty good degree of accuracy what her primary sex hormone are doing.

If she tells me that she's this age, and the first day of her last menstrual period was 12 days ago, I know that she is in the estrogenic phase of her cycle. I can pretty much make predictions about what she's going to be feeling. If she tells me that she's on day 24, I can make a different set of predictions. It's very predictable. So cyclical, not unpredictable.

Men's primary sex hormone, testosterone, on the other hand, is a little bit unpredictable. We know that men's primary sex hormone changes in response to things in the environment that suggest either it's a good idea or a bad idea to be competing or exerting mating effort. We know from research that men's testosterone levels change in response to age. They change in response to the time of day. We know that they're higher in the morning than they are in the evening.

They change in response to relationship status. So when men get married, their testosterone levels decrease. They decrease further when they have children. We know that if their favorite sports team wins, their testosterone increases. If their favorite sports team loses, their testosterone levels decrease. If their favorite political candidate wins or loses, their testosterone levels change.

Their testosterone levels even change if they see weapons. There's been studies where they put men into a room, and sitting next to them at a table, there's either guns or there's tennis rackets. When men are in the room with the guns, their testosterone levels increase. If I were to make a prediction about what a given man's levels of testosterone are, I would need to know a lot more information than just how old he is and when is the first day of his last menstrual cycle.

I'd need to know what time of the day it was. Is he married? Is he considering not being married? Has his favorite political figure just won or lost? Has he seen a weapon? Is there a beautiful woman in the room? Men's primary sex hormone actually is a little bit unpredictable, but not unpredictable. It just changes more frequently, and it changes in response to environmental factors. These things are good, and they make us better.

The idea that men's hormones change and that that changes how men think, feel, and experience the world, it's supposed to. We talked about what happens when men become fathers, and how testosterone decreases and how that's functional, and it helps to redirect men's effort toward doing the things that are going to help promote their relationship and their reproductive success.

The same is true for women. As women's hormones change across the cycle, they're orienting women's brains and women's bodies toward doing those things that are going to help promote their reproductive outcomes, orienting them toward attraction and sex during the first half of the cycle, and then orienting themselves toward pregnancy and implantation during the second half of the cycle.

This is something that doesn't make us worse, it just makes us different. When we start talking about some of the biological differences between men and women, including the biological differences in our hormones, we need to not be afraid of having these conversations, because we can have these different paths, and it doesn't mean that one is better or worse than the other. The fact is that men and women differ in ways that extend far beyond the shape and nature of their reproductive organs.

We can't really understand the experience of being female without understanding our cycling sex hormones. The fact of the matter is, ignoring just how important our hormonal changes are across the cycle, ignoring that has set the stage for the birth control pill. The birth control pill, while it's not bad, it does make women different. When we change women's hormones, we change women.

Without having these open discussions about the ways that hormones shape the way that women's brains work, and the way that they think and feel and experience the world, we can be really cavalier about things like changing a woman's sex hormones. We can be recommending things like the birth control pill for things like acne and cycle irregularities. When we're doing that, we're not only changing a woman's proclivity to acne or their tendency to have irregular cycles, but we're changing the women themselves.

One of the things that we're going to be talking about as we start to move forward is, we're going to be talking about how some of the promises that we were made about denying the importance of sex and denying the importance of hormones has really been dangerous for women. Because throughout most of history, and particularly in not-so-recent history, but in the time of my mom's generation, there was very much this idea out in the world that, in order for women to be treated equally to men, that the thing that we needed to do was completely deny our biology.

There was this idea that the only way that we can prove that we are equal to men and that we're deserving of the same rights as men and that we should be able to vote and own land and have jobs is by saying, "Our hormones don't matter, and we're just like you, except for the differences in our reproductive organs." But even though we've all been promised that denying our biological sex would be this great deliverer for women and would allow us to transcend sexism, it's actually had the opposite effect.

And by ignoring biological sex, and trying to ignore the fact that our bodies and our brains differ from those of men in ways that have absolutely nothing to do with our reproductive organs, we've actually created a lot more harm than good for women's mental and physical health. And so next time, when we pick up, we're going to be talking about some of the ways that biological sex denial has ultimately created and laid the groundwork for bad health care for women, but then also laying the groundwork for dismissing the importance of women's hormones and being really cavalier about the birth control pill.

My question is, if someone is taking a hormone replacement like progesterone, so now it's a consistent level all the time of what they're getting in their body, essentially, do they get stuck in the luteal phase then, along with the things that come with being in the luteal phase?

Yeah, that's a really interesting question. If you're not taking estrogen and you're just taking progesterone, your body is going to be running—like, we talked about hormones are sort of like software—it will be running the progesterone program. But depending on what your levels of estrogen are like, because if your levels of estrogen are really high and the progesterone levels are lower, you'll also be running the estrogen program.

And so, what you feel like and the physiological impact that it has on your body is going to depend, really, on the ratio of those two hormones. But if you are in a state where it's always progesterone is the dominant hormone, then you will feel some of those differences. You'll feel your body running the progesterone program.

What steps should fathers take for their daughters who are coming around that age, 13, 14 years old, past knowing this information to help guide their daughters through this? Because I feel like it's such a thing of, they stay away. But obviously, that's a really important time for a daughter to have her father in life. Can you speak on that?

Yeah. No, that's a really interesting question. I think that all parents can really be supportive by having open conversations about hormonal changes and some of the psychological and behavioral and even physical changes that happen in response to that, and not having it be something that is seen as a liability. I know in my household with my daughter, that when she first started cycling, she was having really crazy mood changes, and they were really bad.

We just talked about what her body is doing and talked about the fact that especially teenagers, their cycles also tend to be unpredictable, and sometimes they're really heavy. It's because their brains and ovaries are learning to communicate with each other, and so they don't always get it right. Just helping them understand and have a language to understand what's happening, I think is so helpful.

I think, I look at my situation with my daughter because she went through years where her cycle was, like, she couldn't predict it, and it was heavy, and just even understanding that her brain and her ovaries are learning to talk to each other, and that it's going to get better. Then seeing that it was getting better, and over time things did get better. And with her mood, just being able to support those changes and say, "This is really common to be feeling this way right now, and it feels like the bottom is dropping off."

But your brain is also adjusting to that, because as you go into the luteal phase in particular, and your amygdala is becoming more interconnected with these other areas of your brain, and you're not used to that, it feels like, "Why does everybody hate me?" Because you don't realize that you're going to ebb and flow between how sensitive you are to signs of threat. Just even giving her a language to be able to understand what's happening, I think, can really do a lot and really help daughters as they learn to understand their bodies.

Past knowing the information, having the conversations, what proactive steps should husbands take with their wives in knowing this information as it relates to their sex life and expectations?

I think there's been such a disservice to women by not being taught about this. Again, we talked about this with calories, but the same is true as sexual desire. It's like, we've all been told it's, like, one size fits all, and you should have this amount of sexual desire, and you should have this amount to eat. Meanwhile, women are like, "This doesn't fit me. Is there something wrong with me? Is there something wrong with my relationship?"

I think that having a partner and teaching your partner about this, and then knowing that yourself and having those open conversations about this, I think is a total game-changer. I think that it's really the key to true intimacy, is being able to discuss these things and having these be issues that are shared within the relationship. I know that, within my own relationship, my husband is very tuned in to—he knows my cycle better than I do. He's like, "You're day 19." I'm like, "I am not." Then I look at my, and it's, like, day 19. I'm like, "All right, fine."

But having those conversations and understanding it, it's being able to—he knows not to take things too personally. If I react differently in the luteal phase, for example, if something seems threatening to me, he understands now why the fact that he loaded the dishwasher wrong can seem like a threat, almost like, "If you loved me more, you would do it the right—" which is silly when you say it out loud, but your fear-primed brain, that's ultimately where you're at. Being able to have open communication about that stuff, I think, is hugely important.

Then with the sexual desire, also same thing, because I think that very many men, because men don't cycle like women do, if their partner has low sexual desire, they think that there's something wrong with them or there's something wrong with their relationship. Because for men, oftentimes, that's what causes low sexual desire, not the fact that you have this other hormone that's turning the volume down. Having that conversation also, I think, changes men's expectations about what's normal. I think it's a huge relief.

I know that I've gotten so much feedback from men who read my first book, where I talked a little bit about cyclicity and desire, and they were like, "I have been feeling stressed out about this my entire relationship, because I was feeling like there was something wrong with me or something wrong with my relationship. I didn't realize, and I was putting all this pressure on my partner, and I didn't realize that—and the reason I was putting pressure on my partner was that I wanted validation that there's not something wrong with me and not something wrong with the relationship."

Having that open conversation and realizing that, it takes the pressure off men, and then they don't put as much pressure on women because a lot of the pressure, I think, that comes from men, is men feeling like they need to validate their partner's attraction to them because they don't understand what's wrong. I really think that having open conversations about these changes is, like I said, I think it's a real door-opener with true intimacy.

When a woman is testing her hormones when she's getting older, and the doctor only wants her to be tested at day 17 or day 18, how does that work for the rest of the cycle in knowing what's happening?

I could write a dissertation on this topic. So one-shot hormone measures, where it's like, and it's usually day three, because that's when they want to look at FSH, which is follicle-stimulating hormone, and then something like day 17 or 22, because they're trying to look at progesterone release, when they take these one-shot hormone measures, they can be kind of useful.

So if I measure you at day, let's say, 17 or 22, and there's no progesterone, I'm just going to say, "OK, those are really, really low levels. You probably didn't ovulate this cycle." But even with that, you might have ovulated the cycle before, and it just might be this one cycle that you're not. And so these one-shot hormone measures are oftentimes not very informative, and they're also not very informative because the range of what normal is, and I'm sure any of the women in this room who have had their hormones measured, the range of what normal is, it's huge.

It's like saying, "A normal income is a difference between $30,000 a year and $2 million a year. If you're somewhere in here, you're normal," and that's just not helpful at all. And so there's so much range, because there's so many individual differences. And so, obviously, the best solution to this is that you test regularly across the lifespan. But if you can't do that now, what I would recommend is, they do have these at-home tests now where you can measure your hormones every day across the cycle.

Like, Mira Fertility has one that's really nice. You do it at home, which is nice. You do these little strips and you stick them in a device, and it gives you your hormone levels. Do that for one or so cycles and you don't need to bankrupt yourself buying hormone strips. But then learn the physiological indicators, too, because when you start to notice, like, if you measure your body temperature and there's differences in cervical mucus that you can pick up on, and you'll also notice, there's oftentimes just some other physical changes that you can monitor that will help to—you can give those a label.

If you do it one or two cycles, where you're measuring your hormones and you're feeling around for cervical mucus and you're measuring your temperature, you'll start to learn what your body, like, "Oh, OK, this is what it feels like when I start to release progesterone. OK, got it." And then, "Oh, OK, this is what it feels like when I'm normally ovulating." Then after you do that, a couple of cycles, you don't need to buy the hormone test anymore. You'll just be able to tell. That, I think, is really useful, and especially for women as you get older.

I mean, I'm in my late 40s now, and I've been measuring hormones more or less, and just tracking my cycle and everything for a long time. It's really useful, but of course, they don't— because now I'm like, OK, I can see what's happening here. But a lot of women don't know to start, and so then they're in this situation where they feel like they're in a hormonal no man's land. I really do like those daily hormone testers, and then learning to identify within your own body when you're ovulating and when you're not.

So one last thing I want to say about that is, if your hormone levels are normal and your doctor is telling you that there's not anything wrong and you're not in perimenopause or you're not whatever because your hormone levels are normal, that's not appropriate, because a normal, like I said, $30,000 and $2 million. If you're somebody who owns—let's say that you have a $2-million-a-year salary, and then they measure your salary and it comes back at $30,000 and they say, "You didn't lose any money," no, that's not true.

You did. You just lost over a million bucks, but it's just because you started at, your normal was high and then you're low, you're still within the range of normal. If they don't have a baseline and they tell you, "Well, your hormones are normal," but you don't feel like things are right, then I would find a different doctor who's willing to listen to your symptoms, instead of just relying on a hormone test.

I have a question about progesterone, as it relates to lowering or dampening the immune system, you had mentioned—how people with asthma might get worse during the luteal phase. It can increase chronic illness symptoms. But I'm having trouble understanding where they also will put people on immune suppressants to manage those types of symptoms as well. So you'd think progesterone would actually make those symptoms better.

Yeah, it depends on what they are. For example, because even some types of autoimmune disease are the result of an overacting of the Th1 immune response, and some are the result of an overacting of the Th2 response. We find that certain autoimmune conditions get worse when progesterone is high and some get better. So some of it just depends on what the condition is, because there are conditions that get worse—like I said, asthma, because your respiratory drive increases, and that means that your feelings of breathlessness are oftentimes going to get worse.

But there are other conditions where women feel better. And so, migraine headaches, for example, is one where, many times, although some women get worsening migraines in the luteal phase, it's like, the way that all of this works is not something that's totally well understood, just because women have been understudied for so long that we know very little about these things. But many women experience relief of migraine headaches during the luteal phase of the cycle, just because of some of the neuro-modulatory effects that progesterone has on the brain.

It actually increases what's called a GABAergic activity in the brain, so it slows the brain down. And one of the things that tends to cause migraines is, it's like overexcitement in the brain. It's too much excitement. And same with epilepsy. So many people who have epilepsy get relief also in the luteal phase of the cycle. So you get some things that can get worse, and some things that can get better.

How you said one size doesn't fit all in this phase for nutrition, do you think we could correlate, as well, one size does not fit all for mental health guidelines?

Fascinating. No, absolutely. Absolutely. One would expect, and we do tend to see premenstrual worsening, or it's called PMEs, or premenstrual exacerbations, of different types of mental health conditions. But you can also get it where you get premenstrual exacerbations of just everyday bad mood that can push itself into a diagnostic level, if it's measured in the luteal phase, which I hadn't even thought of, but is really fascinating.

And so I would think that it might be helpful to do, to administer the DSM criteria at different cycle phases and see whether you got significant differences, and then where you land with your diagnosis. That's fascinating. Another just really quick thing, because this is where I thought you were going, was, there is some research that finds that extinction training that you do for people who have, or extinction therapy, for people who have PTSD—this is where you try to, it's like exposure therapy, where you try to get somebody to extinguish their fear of some sort of an event or a stimulus.

It works less well in the luteal phase than it does in the follicular phase. There's been several studies now that have found that to be true, and they find this to be true both in rats and in humans. There's also probably a really important role for cycle phase, in terms of helping different types of therapeutic interventions as well.

Like, for instance, OCD and exposure therapy and things like that.

I would bet that would be exactly the same thing. I'm thinking that would be exactly the same thing.

Last question would be understanding that, during this time or this phase, the luteal phase, the immune system is more dampened or suppressed. At a time right now where there's so many different health things out there as far as detox, parasite cleanse, intense exercise, and all that, would you actually recommend not doing those things during that phase?

Yeah. I mean, the body is working harder during that time. If I was doing this across the cycle, I would put anything that's going to stress your body out, do it in the follicular phase. I find that there's also been some research, and I didn't talk about this, because I thought I wasn't going to have enough time. I'm like, "I should have added that in there." But there is also research showing that we don't put on muscle mass as well during the second half of the cycle as we do during the first half of the cycle, because estrogen actually primes a lot of pathways that help to build muscle tissue.

It's anabolic, meaning that it likes to build tissue, and progesterone is catabolic, and it likes to break tissue down and differentiate cells. They've done research where they have women doing the same amount of exercise at just, heavy loading during different points in their cycle. What they find is that, when you have women exercising or doing more of their resistance training in the follicular phase of the cycle, that they build more muscle mass than they do when they do the exact same number of workouts, but are doing most of their heavy lifting in the luteal phase.

Anything that's going to stress the body out and make it work harder than it already is, I tend to heavy-load those things in the first two weeks of the cycle and try to be more gentle with myself in the second two weeks of the cycle. It really makes a difference because—and again, if you wear an Oura ring, it's really easy to see, your recovery scores are always worse in the last two weeks of the cycle. It's just that your body needs more time.

It's working so hard. Your basal metabolic rate is up. You're differentiating a bunch of tissue, getting ready for the possibility of pregnancy, and you're just you're strapped. Just making a point of understanding this and going to bed earlier and trying to manage your stress and not treating your body like an amusement park. I can go out with my friends, we can drink a bottle of wine and whatever, and I can go to bed late in the first two weeks of my cycle, I'm fine. I wake up and I'm right as rain; I'm ready to go for a run.

I do that in the second half of the cycle. It's terrible. It's like I drove off a cliff. My recovery is terrible, my heart rate never dropped. This is very common for women in the second half of the cycle, because the luteal phase is a time of this incredibly metabolically stressful period in the cycle. Anything that puts stress in the body, first two weeks. You're welcome.